# Causal_NHB
Association and causal mediation between Marital Status and Depression: A Large-scale, Two-stage, Cross-country Analysis



Depressive symptoms represents a significant global public health challenge, and marital status has been recognized as a potential risk factor. However, previous investigations of this association have primarily focused on the Western samples with substantial heterogeneity. Our study aimed to examine the association between marital status and depressive symptoms across countries with diverse cultural backgrounds using a large-scale, two-stage, cross-country analysis. We utilized nationally representative, de-identified individual-level data from seven countries (106,556 cross-sectional and 20,865 longitudinal participants), representing approximately 541 million adults. The follow-up duration ranged from 4 to 18 years. Our analysis revealed that unmarried individuals had a higher risk of having depressive symptoms versus married counterparts across all countries (Pooled OR 1.86, 95% CI: 1.61-2.14). However, the magnitude of this risk was influenced by country, sex, and education level, with greater risk in Western versus Eastern countries, among males versus females, and those with higher versus lower education. Furthermore, alcohol drinking causally mediated increased later depressive symptom risk among widowed, divorced/separated, and single Chinese, Korean, and Mexican participants (all P < 0.001). Similarly, smoking was as identified as a causal mediator among single individuals in China and Mexico, and the results remain unchanged in the bootstrap resampling validation and the sensitivity analyses. Our cross-country analysis underscores the need for culturally-sensitive interventions targeting unmarried individuals, according to country, sex, education and alcohol and smoking behaviors, to mitigate depressive symptoms risk.
